=== Organizers ===
David Dean, ORNL
Stefano Gandolfi, LANL
Gaute Hagen, ORNL
Morten Hjorth-Jensen, MSU and UOslo
Jason Holt, TRUMF
Thomas Papenbrock, UTK and ORNL
Martin Savage, INT and UW

=== Project title ===
Advances in many-body theories: from first principle methods to quantum computing and machine learning


=== Tentative dates:  ===
September-December 2019

=== Expected number of participants: ===
30-40
=== Abstract for the ECT* website ===

Quantum computing and machine learning are two of the most promising
approaches for studying complex physical systems where several length
and energy scales are involved.  Traditional many-particle methods,
either quantum mechanical or classical ones, face huge dimensionality
problems when applied to studies of systems with many interacting
particles.  By bringing together experts from these fields, this
workshop will explore the links between these exciting new approaches
and traditional many-particle methods in order to map out future
research paths.

=== Scope of the workshop ===

Quantum Computing offers now an interesting avenue, together with
traditional algorithms, for studying complex quantum mechanical
systems.  Machine learning algorithms for unsupervised learning have
recently also been successfully applied to studies of interacting
many-particle systems.  Enabling simulations of large-scale many-body
systems is a long-standing problem in scientific computing. Quantum
many-body interactions define the structure of the universe, from
nucleons and nuclei, to atoms, molecules, and even stars. Since the
discovery of quantum mechanics, a lot of progress has been made in
understanding the dynamics of certain many-body systems. While some of
our insight comes from a small set of analytically solvable models,
numerical simulations have become a mainstay in our understanding of
many-body dynamics. The progress in numerical simulations has
accelerated in the last few decades with the advent of modern high
performance computing and clever developments in classical simulation
algorithms such as, various quantum Monte Carlo methods (from lattice QCD to the many-body problem), 
large-scale diagonalization
approaches, Coupled-Cluster theory and other renormalization schemes.
Despite the monumental advances, classical simulation techniques are
reaching fundamental limits in terms of the size of the quantum
systems that can be processed. Fortunately, the disruptive new field
of quantum simulations has emerged, promising to enable simulations
far beyond those which are classically tractable. In particular,
scientific applications concerned with simulations of interacting
fermions on a lattice are poised to reap the benefits of quantum
simulations.  Algorithms from Quantum Computing represent thus one
possible path to overcome the dimensional curse of traditional
many-body methods. Another alternative is to use Machine Learning
algorithms to study quantum mechanical systems. Here one can think of
using restricted Boltzmann machines and unsupervised learning to improve
and optimize correlations in classical quantum mechanical many-body
methods. There is quite some interest recently in this.


The aim of this workshop is thus to bring together theorists who work
on traditional first principle methods (from lattice QCD to the
nuclear many-body problem) as well as scientists who have explored
quantum computing and machine learning algorithms applied to
interacting many-body systems. The aim is to map out future strategies
and synergies between these various communities in order to develop
further our knowledge and competences about strongly interacting
quantum mechanical systems. The emphasis will be on interacting
fermions and the nuclear many-body problem in particular, spanning
from Lattice QCD to nuclei and dense nuclear matter.

=== Scienfitic goals of the meeting ===

The scientific goals of the meeting are 
1) Present status of existing
many-body theories, in particular with an emphasis on the nuclear
many-body problem with Hamiltonians based on effective field
theories. Present challenges for future studies and comparisons
between different first principle methods.  
2) Review the present
status of Lattice QCD calculations and in particular applications to
multi-nucleon systems and nuclear forces. Discuss challenges and
future paths.  
3) Present status of quantum many-body studies with
quantum computing. Present challenges and possibilities for studies of
nuclear many-body problems and to simulate these systems.  
4) Present
status of machine learning approaches to quantum many-body problems
and present challenges and possibilities on how to simulate
interacting fermionic systems.  
5) Summarize and present future
synergies for the nuclear many-body problem. The final aim is to wrap
up a report with these summaries that will be widely disseminated via
preprint services like ArXiv and finally as a regular article
(European Journal of Physics A or Journal of Physics G or similar
journals)


=== Outline of the program ===

The scientific program follows closely the five scientific goals
outlined above. We aim at having talks in the morning, from 9am till
1230pm and then fewer and shorter selected talks in the afternoon
allowing for ample discussion time in order to map out synergies and
fertilize new research paths.  The talks in the morning will be longer
overview talks on the present status of various many-body theories, from Lattice
QCD to many-body theories as well as presenting recent progress in
quantum computing and machine learning applied to interacting
many-body problems.  The last day will be devoted to shorter summary
talks and drafting the final paper as well as for discussions.

=== List of key speakers ===

Dean Lee, Alexey Bazavov, Scott Bogner, Andrea Shindler, Hue-Wey Lin and Heiko Hergert, Michigan State University, expertise in many-body theories and Lattice QCD
Joe Carlson and Diego Lonardoni, Los Alamos National Laboratory, expertise in many-body methods
Titus Morris, Eugene Dumitrescu, Lougovski Pavel, Pooser Raphael and Gustav Jansen, Oak Ridge, quantum computing, quantum information theory and many-body theory 
Ian Cloet, Argonne National Laboratory, quantum computing
John Preskill, California Institute of Technology, quantum computing
Giuseppe Carleo, ETH, Zurich, machine learning
William Detmold, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lattice QCD and effective field theories
Joaquin Drut, University of North Carolina, many-body theory
Francesco Pederiva, University of Trento, many-body theory
Kenneth Roche, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, quantum computing 
Matthias Troyer, Microsoft, machine learning and quantum computing
Zohreh Davoudi, University of Maryland, lattice QCD and effective field theory
Matthew Dietrich, Argonne National Laboratory
Natalie Klco, University of Washington, quantum computing
Ali Alavi and Alex Thom, University of Cambridge, many-body theory
Karol Kowalski, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, many-body theory
Jennifer Lilieholm, University of Washington, quantum computing
Petr Navratil, TRIUMF, many-body theory
Alessandro Roggero, Los Alamos National Laboratory, quantum computing and many-body theory

=== Budget ===

We expect that all participants will cover their own travel. Some of us will be fully self-supported. We have not yet explored other sources of funding. This will be pursued in a more consistent way if the workshop gets approved. We would expect to receive support from various National Laboratories in the US and companies involved with the development of quantum computers. 